Alejandro Covarrubias 
Glenn Chang
Melanie Carranza
Guns in America: 
Topics Deepening the Partisan Divide in US Politics

Research Question
How do partisan discussions on gun control contribute to the polarization in US politics, as evidenced by using topic-based modeling and sentiment analysis on politically related conversations?

This research offers insight by quantifying the difference in ideology between the two dominating parties in the US and how it is depicted through different topics and content sentiment. Another aspect of importance we can highlight is how we view a sample of how parties exploit polarization, using linguistic strategies to appeal to their respective constituency, form bias, and garner party support. The research not only calls attention to the divisive topic of gun control but also reflects on the broader dynamics of the US political landscape. It provides a different lens of analysis that relates to political discourse and partisan identity. The approach provides political context to how far polarization has gone to affect political communication in the US through newsletters.
Introduction
Organizations like the PEW Research Center and the Niskanen Center have studied the decisive nature of gun control in the United States. PEW based its research on self-administered web surveys, attained through randomized residential addresses, to diversify the research to secure a representative sample of 5109 Americans in 2021. PEW analyzed policy proposals regarding gun control and the perceived danger of gun control and highlighted a growing partisan divide (2021) apart from a few specific policies receiving bipartisan support. To reference one example, survey visuals categorized by party affiliation illustrate this divide, 53% of Americans say gun laws should be stricter than they are, including 81% democrats/democratic leaning and 20% republican/republican leaning. Overall, the data suggested conclusive evidence within the sample weighted to be representative of the US population by gender, race, ethnicity, partisan affiliation, education, and other categories that the partisan split on gun control remains a polarizing issue in the United States.

The Niskanen Center offers a different perspective, calling attention to how gun owners and non-gun-owners are becoming increasingly politically distant during the developing partisan culture of the United States political landscape. The division is especially pronounced following mass shootings that occur in the US, both parties revert to their corners on gun control that have curated a culture of pro-gun and anti-gun culture. The Center’s researchers note these polarized identities align closely with voting behaviors, all under the impression of promoting the safety of citizens. Notably, after mass shootings, interest groups like the NRA offer institutional support that bolsters gun owner culture while consequently fueling the opposing anti-gun movement. The counterproductive cycle prevents policy advancement on either side because both parties remain in their polarizing corner of solutions. in their respective policies to fix the issue. Both organizations have already studied this question which prompted our team’s interest in the topic to utilize text as data analysis to view another perspective of the polarizing nature of gun control in America.
Methodology
Data Source: Congressional Member E-Newsletters
Analysis Tools: Topic Modeling, Sentiment Analysis using Lexicoder Sentiment Dictionary

We opted for 15 topics in our topic model to strike the balance between the risk of overgeneralization associated with too few topics and the potential of being overly specific which can arise with too many topics. 
Figure 1: 


Topic 1: Latino Outreach appears to be an attempt to mobilize the Latino community since the topic is dominated by Spanish words. Topic 2: Congressional Updates contains the words congressman and the stem word office which are the typical congressional newsletter update. Topic 3: Programming communications, contains the words null, var, index, and multiple functions. Topic 4: Veterans Day could indicate discussions regarding the national holiday and students' free school day. Topic 5: Tax policies, points to a discussion on tax legislation. Topic 6: Higher Education Government Aid as suggested by words grant and fund. Topic 7: Legislature productivity because the frequent words, act, house, and committee could be regarding legislative activities. Topic 8: Gun violence and gun control considering we have words like tragedy, prevent, shoot, and gun. Topic 9: Constitutional conversations as suggested by office, congress, phone, appoint, and fax. Topic 10: Healthcare since we see words like vaccine, covid, protect, help, and insulin. Topic 11: Amendment rights, specifically the second Amendment on concealing firearms. Topic 12: Biden Administration covering topics regarding the border and other executive policies. Topic 13: Military defenses in multiple ways since we have words like navy, air-launch, and submarines. Topic 14: Presidential Politics to represent the actions of the president. Topic 15: Senatorial Correspondence because the words have senate forms of communication. 

Analysis
The first step in answering our research question is to investigate whether Democrats and Republicans cover gun violence differently. Based on the output of our structural topic model, topic 8 will be the main focus of this analysis. We applied the estimated effect model to our corpus, which allows us to conditional the expectation of topic prevalence given document characteristics. The output of the estimated effect model is as follows (figure 2): 
Figure 2:

The graph highlights the differences in coverage of different topics by Democrats and Republicans. We can observe that topic 8 skewed heavily to the right, indicating that gun violence is mostly covered by Democrats in this dataset. However, we must take into account that our dataset only contains newsletters after 2009, which may not reflect the true dynamics of the two parties. To test our results, we must compare the number of representatives from each party since 2009, since the relationship we observed could potentially be attributed to more representatives from Democrats in Congress. According to the records, there have been a total of 2,098 and 2,169 Congress representatives from the Democrats and Republicans, respectively, since 2009. The fact that there have been more representatives from Republicans since 2009 testifies that the relationship we uncovered is not due to differences in the number of representatives. Therefore, we can conclude that Democrats have responded to gun violence more actively than Republicans since 2009. 	

After applying the Lexicoder sentiment dictionary to generate sentiment scores of the top 500 newspapers representing the issue of gun control, we are given the sentiment scores of both political parties based on the negative and positive words that the Lexicoder dictionary detected. Through the topic model we used for our research question, we ultimately learned that newspapers from the Democrats on average, scored a lower sentiment score than newspapers from the Republicans. The Democratic party has a sentiment score of -1.80 and the Republican party has a sentiment score of 6.71. To translate what the sentiment score means regarding our research question, a low sentiment score means that they share a negative context when talking about the topic of gun control. 

With the Democratic party having a significantly lower sentiment score, we can conclude that they mentioned the topic a lot more frequently than the Republican party did and they talked about gun violence in a negative tone. Our question aimed to analyze how U.S. politics are polarized on the topic of gun control and we can see based on our STM analysis that the polarization is clear, that both political parties believe the opposite of the other on this topic. The sentiment scores on both political parties alone are very different and it is clear that these parties have different stances. Through the STM analysis, we conclude that the top 15 representative documents on gun violence are all from the Democratic party. 


Limitations 
As we chose our approach to be topic modeling, we understand that there are numerous limitations that this approach introduces to our research question and its results. Our approach includes an STM analysis and a sentiment analysis of our corpus and to do this, we implemented the Lexicoder Sentiment Dictionary to assign sentiment scores. We used 500 newspapers for this analysis which can create a limitation as a larger analysis size increases the validity of our results. The topic of gun control has been well known to invoke many conversations, opinions, and content that highlight the different stances that the political parties hold. We used 500 newspapers that cover gun control but these newspapers do not speak for every resource talking about gun control meaning that these results could be specific to these newspapers only. A larger data size would be necessary to analyze a topic as widely known as gun control. 

The goal was to see which political party, the Democrat or the Republican party, had a lower sentiment score. In doing this, we potentially introduced a limitation to our approach as the Lexicoder Sentiment Dictionary assigns sentiment scores based on whether the words are positive or negative and does not take the text's tone into account. The tone is something that should be taken into account since we are looking at newspapers that distinguish between political parties. When it comes to politics, people express their opinions differently which could significantly impact the Lexicoder dictionary if what is being said is not what is trying to be conveyed. We know that the Lexicoder dictionary is only looking at the words, meaning that there could be certain political phrases and jokes that the dictionary cannot distinguish, which can introduce bias to our results. 


Conclusion
Despite these possible limitations, possible next steps for this research question include using a larger dataset to increase validity and check results, looking at other sources of partisan discussions on gun control beyond just newspapers will help provide a deeper understanding of a concerning issue in America. Additionally, investigations behind the reasons in differing sentiment levels, a more nuanced description, can offer informative insights to the root causes of polarization. Furthermore, our analysis can serve as a foundation for creating more inclusive policies by highlighting the polarizing nature of gun control discussions and the distinct approaches of the two dominating political parties, by prompting politicians to suggest comprehensive policies. Such policies that aim to bridge disparity between the opposing views held in the political spectrum. Efforts that increase transparency in the US political discussions, help mitigate the same polarization that stalls policy progression. Ultimately, this approach enhances democratic productivity by cultivating diverse viewpoints for the policy making process.









Works cited 
“Amid a Series of Mass Shootings in the U.S., Gun Policy Remains Deeply Divisive.” Pew Research Center - U.S. Politics & Policy, Pew Research Center, 20 Apr. 2021, www.pewresearch.org/politics/2021/04/20/amid-a-series-of-mass-shootings-in-the-u-s-gun-policy-remains-deeply-divisive/. 
Cormack, Lindsey. DCinbox, 2009, www.dcinbox.com/. 
“Episode 5: How Gun Politics and Gun Policy Polarize America - Niskanen Center.” Niskanen Center - Improving Policy, Advancing Moderation, 6 Feb. 2024, www.niskanencenter.org/episode-5-gun-politics-gun-policy-polarize-america/. 

